Tutorial: How to set up a redirect test (#6981)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/tutorials/redirect-testing.md

---
title: How to do redirect testing
date: 2023-10-19
author: ["ian-vanagas"]
showTitle: true
sidebar: Docs
featuredImage: ../images/tutorials/banners/tutorial-16.png
tags: ['experimentation', 'feature flags']
---

> Redirect testing is a way to A/B test web pages by redirecting users to one or the other. It is a popular way to split test landing pages, for example.

Reviewer: The second sentence doesnt add anything I feel. Feels like it's just there for SEO keywords
```suggestion
Redirect testing is a way to A/B test web pages by redirecting users to one or the other.
```

> To show you how to set up a redirect test with PostHog, we create a two-page Next.js app, create an experiment in PostHog, and then implement it in our app using middleware and feature flags. 

Reviewer: Let's stick with A/B test, since thats what we refered to it above
```suggestion
To show you how to set up a redirect test with PostHog, we create a two-page Next.js app, create an A/B test in PostHog, and then implement it in our app using middleware and feature flags. 
```

      <PHProvider>
        <body>{children}</body>
      </PHProvider>
    </html>
  )
}
```

Once set up, PostHog autocaptures usage and you can use all its tools throughout your app.

## Adding test pages

In the `app` folder, create two new folders named `control` and `test`. In each of them, create a basic `page.js` file with a button to capture an event. This is what the control page looks like:

```js
// app/control/page.js
'use client'
import { usePostHog } from "posthog-js/react";

export default function Control() {
  const posthog = usePostHog();

  return (
    <main>
      <h1>Hello!</h1>
      <button onClick={() => posthog.capture("main_button_clicked")}>
        Click me!
      </button>
    </main>
  );
}
```

This is what the test page looks like:

```js
// app/test/page.js
'use client'
import { usePostHog } from "posthog-js/react";

export default function Test() {
  const posthog = usePostHog();

  return (
    <main>
      <h1>Hello from the bright side!</h1>
			<p>Clicking this button will bring you happiness</p>
      <button onClick={() => posthog.capture("main_button_clicked")}>
        I want to be happy!
      </button>
    </main>
  );
}
```

> Now we can run `npm run dev`, go to each of our pages, `http://localhost:3000/control` and `http://localhost:3000/test`, to see that they work, and click the button to capture a custom event in PostHog (we need it to create our experiment).

Reviewer: Little bit unclear why we need the custom event to create our experiment. Not sure if my exxplanation is clearer, though
```suggestion
Now we can run `npm run dev`. Go to each of our pages to see that they work: `http://localhost:3000/control` and `http://localhost:3000/test`. 

Click the button on each page to capture a custom event in PostHog. We'll use this event as our goal metric in our A/B test
```

![Events](../images/tutorials/redirect-testing/events.png)

> ## Creating our experiment

Reviewer: Again, we havent introduced the term experiment yet, so feels a bit strange. Perhaps there's a more elegant way to introduce it? Or we could just stick with A/B test
```suggestion
## Creating our A/B test
```

> Our A/B test compares these two pages to see which drives more button clicks. To do this, we go to the [experiment tab](https://app.posthog.com/experiments) in PostHog and click "New experiment." Choose a name, feature flag key (like `main-redirect`), set your experiment goal to `main_button_clicked`, and click "Save as draft."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our A/B test compares these two pages to see which drives more button clicks. To do this, we go to the [experiment tab](https://app.posthog.com/experiments) in PostHog and click "New experiment." Name your experiment and feature flag key (like `main-redirect`), set your experiment goal to `main_button_clicked`, and click "Save as draft."
```

> ![A/B test set up](../images/tutorials/redirect-testing/test.png)

Reviewer: I think it may be more helpful to show a screenshot before clicking save as draft. This way people can see the set up

Because we are working locally, you can click "Launch" right after and head back to your app to implement it. 

## Setting up the redirect test middleware

Next.js enables you to run middleware that intercepts and modifies requests for your app. We can use it to run our redirect test.

> To start, create a `middleware.js` file in the base `redirect-test` directory. Match both the `/test` and `/control` paths and have the `/test` path redirect to control as a placeholder.

Reviewer: What does "match both" mean? Im not familiar with what "match" means inthis context. Phrase differently?

Author: rewrote to explain better

```js
// redirect-test/middleware.js
import { NextResponse } from 'next/server'

export async function middleware(request) {
  if (request.nextUrl.pathname=== '/test') {
    return NextResponse.redirect(new URL('/control', request.url))
  }
  return NextResponse.next()
}

export const config = {
  matcher: ['/test', '/control'],
};
```

> Next, we set up the logic for user IDs so we can target our test. We want the user experience to be consistent so we:

Reviewer: do we need this? Can we target our test a different way? Like anonymous ids? 
I think this step is a bit of distraction from the main tutorial, and makes it harder to follow (since we're introducing a new concept)

Reviewer: Oh I see now, it's because we need to make an API call to `decide` in the middleware. Still, this user ID bit threw me off. Can mention it in the beginning as part of what we going to do? Or perhaps there's a better way to make it easier to follow?

Author: Good point, rewritten.

  if (request.nextUrl.pathname=== '/test' && flagResponse === 'control') {
    return NextResponse.redirect(new URL('/control', request.url))
  }
  if (request.nextUrl.pathname=== '/control' && flagResponse === 'test') {
    return NextResponse.redirect(new URL('/test', request.url))
  }
  return NextResponse.next()
}
//... rest of code
```

### Capturing exposure

To get accurate results for our experiment, we also need to capture a `$feature_flag_called` exposure event. This requires another POST request. We can add this in like this:

```js
//... rest of code
const flagResponse = data.featureFlags['main-redirect']

// Capture events, for exposure
const eventOptions = {
  method: 'POST',
  headers: {
    'Content-Type': 'application/json'
  },
  body: JSON.stringify({
    api_key: ph_project_api_key,
    distinct_id: distinct_id,
    properties: {
      "$feature_flag": 'main-redirect',
      "$feature_flag_response": flagResponse
    },
    event: "$feature_flag_called"
  })
};

const eventRequest = await fetch(
  'https://app.posthog.com/capture',
  eventOptions
);

if (request.nextUrl.pathname === '/test' && flagResponse === 'control') {
//... rest of code
```

> ## Bootstrapping the data

Reviewer: Do we need this section? I know it's a cool feature we have, but I feel its a bit of an advanced technique and not strictly necessary for creating redirect tests. My concern is that it makes the tutorial harder to follow

Author: We do, I added a callout explainer on why.

Because we are working locally, you can click "Launch" right after and head back to your app to implement it. 

## Setting up the redirect test middleware

Next.js enables you to run middleware that intercepts and modifies requests for your app. We can use it to run our redirect test.

To start, create a `middleware.js` file in the base `redirect-test` directory. We want it to run on both the `/test` and `/control` paths, so we add them to the matcher config. For now, we have the `/test` path redirect to `/control` as a placeholder.

```js
// redirect-test/middleware.js
import { NextResponse } from 'next/server'

export async function middleware(request) {
  if (request.nextUrl.pathname=== '/test') {
    return NextResponse.redirect(new URL('/control', request.url))
  }
  return NextResponse.next()
}

export const config = {
  matcher: ['/test', '/control'],
};
```

### Getting or creating a user ID for flag evaluation

To evaluate the flags for the experiment in our middleware, we need a distinct user ID to target. We want the user experience to be consistent so we:

1. Check if a `distinct_id` exists in the PostHog cookie, and use it if so.

> 2. Create a `distinct_id` and bootstrap it to the client if not.

Author: Removed bootstrap from here and added later

This requires using your project API key to get the cookies, parsing them as JSON, and potentially creating a distinct ID using `crypto.randomUUID()`. Altogether, this looks like this:

```js
import { NextResponse } from 'next/server'

export async function middleware(request) {
  const ph_project_api_key = '<ph_project_api_key>'
  const ph_cookie_key = `ph_${ph_project_api_key}_posthog`
  const cookie = request.cookies.get(ph_cookie_key);

  let distinct_id;
  if (cookie) {
    // Use PostHog distinct_id 
    distinct_id = JSON.parse(cookie.value).distinct_id;
  } else {
    // Create new distinct_id
    distinct_id = crypto.randomUUID();
  }
//... rest of code
```

### Evaluating our redirect test with PostHog

> With our distinct ID, we can use the PostHog API to evaluate the `main-redirect` feature flag we set up earlier (because we can’t use PostHog SDKs in Next.js middleware). 

Author: rewrote

> With our distinct ID, we can use the PostHog API to evaluate the `main-redirect` feature flag we set up earlier (because we can’t use PostHog SDKs in Next.js middleware). 

Author: There are limited APIs available in the middleware environment: https://vercel.com/docs/functions/edge-functions/edge-runtime#supported-apis

Added this link

> We evaluate the flag by making a POST request to the `https://app.posthog.com/decide?v=3` route (replace `app` with `eu` if you’re on EU Cloud) with your project API key and user distinct ID. From the response, we get the value of the `main-redirect` feature flag and use it to redirect to the right page. Altogether, this looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We evaluate the flag by making a POST request to the `https://app.posthog.com/decide?v=3` route (replace `app` with `eu` if you’re on EU Cloud) with your project API key and user distinct ID. From the response, we get the value of the `main-redirect` feature flag and use it to redirect to the right page. Altogether, it looks like this:
```

```js

> //... rest of code

Reviewer: nit:would just put the file name at the top too

	const requestOptions = {
    method: 'POST',
    headers: {
      'Content-Type': 'application/json'
    },
    body: JSON.stringify({
      api_key: ph_project_api_key,
      distinct_id: distinct_id
    })
  };
  
  // Evaluate experiment flag
  const ph_request = await fetch(

>     'https://app.posthog.com/decide?v=3', // or eu

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    'https://app.posthog.com/decide?v=3', // or eu.posthog.com
```

    requestOptions
  );
  const data = await ph_request.json();
  const flagResponse = data.featureFlags['main-redirect']

  // Redirect to correct page
  if (request.nextUrl.pathname=== '/test' && flagResponse === 'control') {
    return NextResponse.redirect(new URL('/control', request.url))
  }
  if (request.nextUrl.pathname=== '/control' && flagResponse === 'test') {
    return NextResponse.redirect(new URL('/test', request.url))
  }
  return NextResponse.next()
}
//... rest of code
```

### Capturing exposure

> To get accurate results for our experiment, we also need to capture a `$feature_flag_called` exposure event after the feature flag has been evaluated, but before redirecting. This requires another POST request like this:

Reviewer: What is an exposure and exposure event? Why is it important? (I know what it is, but I dont think a new reader will). Let's explain here what we're doing and why

Author: rewrote

```js
//... rest of code, after flag evaluation

// Capture exposure event
const eventOptions = {
  method: 'POST',
  headers: {
    'Content-Type': 'application/json'
  },
  body: JSON.stringify({
    api_key: ph_project_api_key,
    distinct_id: distinct_id,
    properties: {
      "$feature_flag": 'main-redirect',
      "$feature_flag_response": flagResponse
    },
    event: "$feature_flag_called"
  })
};

const eventRequest = await fetch(
  'https://app.posthog.com/capture',
  eventOptions
);

//... rest of code, redirect logic
```

## Bootstrapping the data

The final piece to our redirect test is bootstrapping the user distinct ID (and flags while we are at it).

> > **Why is bootstrapping necessary?** If we didn't bootstrap the distinct ID, PostHog would set a second distinct ID for the same user on the frontend. This disconnects the flag evaluation from the experiment goal tracking on the frontend, breaking our experiment.

Reviewer: I like the new callout. I still dont know what bootstrapping means, though. Let's clarify that.

Also, this particular sentence is confusing: `This disconnects the flag evaluation from the experiment goal tracking on the frontend, breaking our experiment.`

What does disconnect mean? What does "breaking" mean in this context?

Author: added a bootstrap definition and rewrote that paragraph

---
title: How to do redirect testing
date: 2023-10-30
author: ["ian-vanagas"]
showTitle: true
sidebar: Docs
featuredImage: ../images/tutorials/banners/tutorial-16.png
tags: ['experimentation', 'feature flags']
---

Redirect testing is a way to [A/B test](/ab-testing) web pages by redirecting users to one or the other.

To show you how to do a redirect test with PostHog, we set up a two-page Next.js app, create an A/B test in PostHog, and then implement it in our app using middleware and feature flags. 

> > **Note:** Although we are using Next.js in this tutorial, this method works with any framework where you can do server-side redirects.

Reviewer: nice note

```js
// app/control/page.js
'use client'
import { usePostHog } from "posthog-js/react";

export default function Control() {
  const posthog = usePostHog();

  return (
    <main>
      <h1>Hello!</h1>
      <button onClick={() => posthog.capture("main_button_clicked")}>
        Click me!
      </button>
    </main>
  );
}
```

This is what the test page looks like:

```js
// app/test/page.js
'use client'
import { usePostHog } from "posthog-js/react";

export default function Test() {
  const posthog = usePostHog();

  return (
    <main>
      <h1>Hello from the bright side!</h1>
      <p>Clicking this button will bring you happiness</p>
      <button onClick={() => posthog.capture("main_button_clicked")}>
        I want to be happy!
      </button>
    </main>
  );
}
```

Now run `npm run dev`. Go to each of our pages to see that they work: `http://localhost:3000/control` and `http://localhost:3000/test`. 

Click the button on each page to capture a custom event in PostHog.

![Events](../images/tutorials/redirect-testing/events.png)

## Creating our A/B test

> Our A/B test will compare these two pages to see which drives more button clicks. To do this, we go to the [experiment tab](https://app.posthog.com/experiments) (our name for A/B tests) in PostHog and click "New experiment." Name your experiment and feature flag key (like `main-redirect`), set your experiment goal to `main_button_clicked`, and click "Save as draft."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our A/B test will compare these two pages to see which drives more button clicks. To do this, we go to the [experiment tab](https://app.posthog.com/experiments) (what we call A/B tests in PostHog) in PostHog and click "New experiment." Name your experiment and feature flag key (like `main-redirect`), set your experiment goal to `main_button_clicked`, and click "Save as draft."
```

![A/B test set up](../images/tutorials/redirect-testing/test.png)

> Because we are working locally, you can click "Launch" immediately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because we are working locally, you can launch the experiment immediately.
```

## Setting up the redirect test middleware

> Next.js enables you to run [middleware](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/building-your-application/routing/middleware) that intercepts and modifies requests for your app. We use it for our redirect test.

Reviewer: I think just a slighltly longer explanation is needed as to why we're using it. (My suggestion isnt perfect, but just to give an idea)
```suggestion
Next.js enables you to run [middleware](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/building-your-application/routing/middleware) that intercepts and modifies requests for your app. We use it for our redirect test so that we can redirect a user to the `control` or `test` page based on their experiment.
```

To start, create a `middleware.js` file in the base `redirect-test` directory. We want it to run on both the `/test` and `/control` paths, so we add them to the matcher config. For now, we have the `/test` path redirect to `/control` as a placeholder.

```js
// redirect-test/middleware.js
import { NextResponse } from 'next/server'

export async function middleware(request) {
  if (request.nextUrl.pathname=== '/test') {
   // Placeholder for now. We'll replace this code in the next step
    return NextResponse.redirect(new URL('/control', request.url))
  }
  return NextResponse.next()
}

export const config = {
  matcher: ['/test', '/control'],
};
```

> ### Getting or creating a user ID for flag evaluation
> 
> To evaluate the experiment flag in our middleware, we need a distinct user ID to target. This needs to be consistent because we want the same user to see the same variant of the experiment every time.
> 
> To do this, we need to:
> 
> 1. Check if a `distinct_id` exists in the PostHog cookie, and use it if so.
> 2. Create a `distinct_id` if not.
> 
> This requires using your project API key to get the cookies, parsing them as JSON, and potentially creating a distinct ID using `crypto.randomUUID()`. Altogether, this looks like this:

Reviewer: This is still unclear to me. I think this simplifies it:
```suggestion
### Getting or creating a user ID for flag evaluation

To evaluate the experiment flag value for each unique user, each user will need a distinct user ID.

To do this, we need to:

1. Check if a `distinct_id` exists in the PostHog cookie, and use it if so.
2. Create a `distinct_id` if not.

This requires using your project API key to get the cookies, parsing them as JSON, and potentially creating a distinct ID using `crypto.randomUUID()`. Altogether, this looks like this:
```

```js
import { NextResponse } from 'next/server'

export async function middleware(request) {
  const ph_project_api_key = '<ph_project_api_key>'
  const ph_cookie_key = `ph_${ph_project_api_key}_posthog`
  const cookie = request.cookies.get(ph_cookie_key);

  let distinct_id;
  if (cookie) {
    // Use PostHog distinct_id 
    distinct_id = JSON.parse(cookie.value).distinct_id;
  } else {
    // Create new distinct_id
    distinct_id = crypto.randomUUID();
  }
//... rest of code
```

### Evaluating our redirect test with PostHog

With our distinct ID, we use the PostHog API to check the value of the `main-redirect` feature flag for a user (because [we can’t use PostHog SDKs in Next.js middleware](https://vercel.com/docs/functions/edge-functions/edge-runtime#supported-apis)). This is known as evaluating the feature flag.

> Specifically, we evaluate the flag by making a POST request to the `https://app.posthog.com/decide?v=3` route (replace `app` with `eu` if you’re on EU Cloud) with your project API key and user distinct ID. From the response, we get the value of the `main-redirect` feature flag and use it to redirect to the right page. Altogether, it looks like this:

Reviewer: Since we mention the eu endpoint in the code comment, I dont think we need the explanation
```suggestion
Specifically, we evaluate the flag by making a POST request to the `[https://app.posthog.com/decide?v=3](/docs/api/post-only-endpoints#feature-flags)` route with your project API key and user distinct ID. From the response, we get the value of the `main-redirect` feature flag and use it to redirect to the right page. Altogether, it looks like this:
```

```js
// redirect-test/middleware.js
//... rest of code

	const requestOptions = {
    method: 'POST',
    headers: {
      'Content-Type': 'application/json'
    },
    body: JSON.stringify({
      api_key: ph_project_api_key,
      distinct_id: distinct_id
    })
  };
  
  // Evaluate experiment flag
  const ph_request = await fetch(
    'https://app.posthog.com/decide?v=3', // or eu.posthog.com
    requestOptions
  );
  const data = await ph_request.json();
  const flagResponse = data.featureFlags['main-redirect']

  // Redirect to correct page
  if (request.nextUrl.pathname=== '/test' && flagResponse === 'control') {
    return NextResponse.redirect(new URL('/control', request.url))
  }
  if (request.nextUrl.pathname=== '/control' && flagResponse === 'test') {
    return NextResponse.redirect(new URL('/test', request.url))
  }
  return NextResponse.next()
}
//... rest of code
```

> ### Capturing exposure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Capturing exposures
```

> To get accurate results for our experiment, we also need to capture a `$feature_flag_called` event after the feature flag has been evaluated, but before redirecting. This is known as an exposure event and shows a user is part of the experiment. It requires another POST request like this:

Reviewer: Think just an additional sentence is needed to clarify why we need to capture it.  Something along the lines of this.

Also, do we need the "but before redirecting" bit? I dont think so. But if we decide to include, we need to explain why
```suggestion
To get accurate results for our experiment, we also need to capture a `$feature_flag_called` event after the feature flag has been evaluated. This records which experiment variant each user was assigned to, and enables us to calculate results for the experiment.

This is known as an exposure event and shows a user is part of the experiment. It requires another POST request like this:
```

```js
//... rest of code, after flag evaluation

// Capture exposure event
const eventOptions = {
  method: 'POST',
  headers: {
    'Content-Type': 'application/json'
  },
  body: JSON.stringify({
    api_key: ph_project_api_key,
    distinct_id: distinct_id,
    properties: {
      "$feature_flag": 'main-redirect',
      "$feature_flag_response": flagResponse
    },
    event: "$feature_flag_called"
  })
};

const eventRequest = await fetch(
  'https://app.posthog.com/capture',
  eventOptions
);

//... rest of code, redirect logic
```

## Bootstrapping the data

> The final piece to our redirect test is bootstrapping the user distinct ID (and flags while we are at it). Bootstrapping is adding the flag and user data from the server to the client library so it is available as soon as the client PostHog library loads.
> 
> > **Why is bootstrapping necessary?** If we didn't bootstrap the distinct ID, PostHog would set a second distinct ID for the same user on the frontend. When calculating the results of the experiment, PostHog wouldn't know the two were connected, creating a broken test.
> 
> We create a `bootstrapData` cookie with the flags and distinct ID data and then add it to the response. We also add a check for the `bootstrapData` cookie in the middleware when we are creating the distinct ID so we don’t get two different IDs whenever we redirect.
> 
> When put together with everything else, our final `middleware.js` file looks like this:

Reviewer: Just clarifying what bootstrapping means 
```suggestion
The final piece to our redirect test is [bootstrapping](/docs/feature-flags/bootstrapping) the user distinct ID and feature flags. Bootstrapping is when you initialize PostHog with precomputed user data so that it is available as soon as PostHog loads – without needing to make additional API calls 

> **Why is bootstrapping necessary?** If we didn't bootstrap the distinct ID, PostHog would set a second distinct ID for the same user on the frontend. When calculating the results of the experiment, PostHog wouldn't know the two were connected, creating a broken test.

We create a `bootstrapData` cookie with the flags and distinct ID data and then add it to the response. We also add a check for the `bootstrapData` cookie in the middleware when we are creating the distinct ID so we don’t get two different IDs whenever we redirect.

When put together with everything else, our final `middleware.js` file looks like this:
```
